1. Archiving vs. Compressing: What's the difference?
    Archiving: This is the process of collecting multiple files and directories into a single file (often called a "tarball"). It does not reduce the size of the files; it simply "bundles" them so they are easier to move or store.
    Compressing: This is the process of using mathematical algorithms to reduce the total size of data (e.g., removing redundant patterns).
    In Linux, you almost always Archive first, then Compress the resulting archive.

2. The Standard Tool: tar
    The tar (Tape Archive) command is the industry standard for creating archives in Linux.

Common Flags:

    -c: Create an archive.
    -x: Extract an archive.
    -v: Verbose (shows you what files are being processed).
    -f: File (specifies the filename of the archive).
    -z: Use gzip compression.
    -j: Use bjip2 compression (older, but still used).
    Examples:
    Create an archive: tar -cvf backup.tar /path/to/folder
    Create a compressed archive (gzip): tar -czvf backup.tar.gz /path/to/folder
    Extract an archive: tar -xvf backup.tar
    Extract a compressed archive: tar -xzvf backup.tar.gz

3. Compression Utilities
    While tar handles the bundling, it often calls on external compression utilities to do the heavy lifting. You can also use these individually for single files.

Gzip (gzip)
    The most common compression tool. It is fast and efficient.

    Compress a file: gzip filename (creates filename.gz).
    Decompress: gunzip filename.gz or gzip -d filename.gz.
Bzip2 (bzip2)
    Offers better compression ratios than gzip but is slower.

    Compress a file: bzip2 filename (creates filename.bz2).
    Decompress: bunzip2 filename.bz2.
    Xz (xz)
    The modern standard for high compression ratios. It is much slower to compress but produces the smallest file sizes.

    Compress a file: xz filename (creates filename.xz).
    Decompress: unxz filename.xz.
4. Summary Table
Tool	Action	Extension	Best Used For
tar	Bundling	.tar	Grouping files
tar + gzip	Bundling + Compression	.tar.gz	Standard backups
gzip	Compression	.gz	Speed
xz	Compression	.xz	Maximum disk space saving
Pro-Tip: The "Auto-Detect" Feature
You don't actually need to memorize if you should use -z or -j anymore! Modern versions of tar automatically detect the compression type when you use the -a flag (or simply by looking at the file extension).

Example: tar -xavf myfile.tar.xz

This command will automatically identify that it's an .xz file and use the correct decompressor for you.